LEARNED COMPUTING LANGUAGE (LCL)
TITLE: Determinism, Equivalence, and Interpreter Variation
LANGUAGE VERSION: 0.1.0
STATUS: NORMATIVE
DATE: 2026-08-31


The operation registry assigns every core operation exactly one determinism
category: deterministic, nondeterministic, derived, or inherited.

The separate operation category is a closed behavioral classification. read_only
observes or computes and therefore has possible_effects exactly {none}. mutating
may change an external or addressable target. memory_state writes an LCL MEMORY
or STATE target. control coordinates or delegates execution, changes an execution
path, or requests authoritative input. The concrete authority of every category
is still bounded by that row's possible_effects. core.test is control because its
TASK/ACTION mode delegates the reachable graph and may therefore carry effects.

A deterministic operation requires semantically equivalent results, effects,
ordering, and status when its declared inputs, dependency snapshots, selected
profile-role bindings, and implementation versions are identical. Byte-identical
implementation code is not required unless the output contract requires byte
identity.

A nondeterministic operation may vary only inside explicitly permitted
dimensions. All declared types, scopes, hard rules, formats, bounds, checks,
evidence requirements, and success conditions remain invariant. Model or
provider preference cannot redefine language syntax or relax a contract.

A derived operation applies the exact operation-specific mapping named in its
contract to the final categories of every resolved profile and/or graph. An
inherited operation copies the resolved category and
source of the referenced operation. core.retry inherits determinism, dependencies,
effects, and applicable errors from its wrapped ACTION and adds no authority.

possible_dependencies is the maximum dependency set admitted by an operation
contract. Its closed values are declared_state_only, host, network, model, and
human. At each invocation, the actual set is resolved from the target, source,
destination, selected profile, arguments, and referenced execution graph. When
no external capability is selected, it is exactly {declared_state_only}; that
value is exclusive and cannot be combined with another dependency.

The dependency values have these exact meanings:

- declared_state_only reads only declared LCL values, immutable definitions, and
  invocation-local or internal execution snapshots; it selects no host, network,
  model, or human capability.
- host reads or invokes an addressable resource or capability supplied by the
  execution host, excluding a separately declared network, model, or human
  capability.
- network reads from or invokes a remote endpoint or transport capability. It
  does not by itself imply the network effect.
- model obtains inference or generation from the selected LC or model capability.
- human obtains an authoritative response or decision from a human.

possible_effects is the maximum effect set admitted by an operation contract.
Its closed values are none, filesystem, network, process, package, message,
memory, and state. At each invocation, the actual set is resolved from the
selected targets, destinations, profiles, arguments, and referenced execution
graph. When no observable effect can occur, it is exactly {none}; that value is
exclusive and cannot be combined with another effect. A dependency does not by
itself imply the same-named effect.

The effect values have these exact meanings:

- none produces no observable state change or outbound communication.
- filesystem creates, changes, moves, or deletes filesystem content or metadata.
- network performs a primary transfer, copy, download, upload, or publication
  over a network, or creates, changes, or removes network-addressed content.
  Remote access used only as observation or computation input is a dependency.
  Remote transport used only to realize a process, package, message, memory, or
  state effect is not an additional network effect.
- process starts, executes, stops, or otherwise changes a native process or
  service.
- package changes installed package state or package-manager records.
- message sends an externally observable message or request to a recipient.
- memory changes an LCL MEMORY target.
- state changes an LCL STATE or OUTPUT target, an authorized addressable target
  not classified as filesystem, network, or memory, or internal execution-unit
  or lifecycle state.

A REFERENCE used as an address is classified by the address class of its
resolved target, never by REFERENCE syntax. PATH mutation resolves filesystem,
URI content mutation resolves network, and mutation of OUTPUT or another
authorized non-filesystem, non-network, non-memory, non-STATE addressable target
resolves state. core.create, core.write, core.append, core.modify, core.rename,
core.delete, and core.generate prohibit MEMORY and STATE targets; core.move
prohibits MEMORY and STATE sources. Those mutations use core.memory_write or
core.state_update. core.copy may observe MEMORY or STATE as a source, but its
source observation adds no source-side effect.

When an operation contract names one or more selected or implementation profile
roles, the exact operation identifier, profile role, target or address class,
arguments, implementation identifier, and implementation version select exactly
one immutable profile for each role before effects. Every profile states all
properties required by
operations_v0.1.0.json#/axis_contract/implementation_profile, including its
determinism source, maximum dependency/effect sets, and invocation-resolution
rule. A profile's determinism category is exactly one final value,
deterministic or nondeterministic; derived and inherited are operation-row
resolution markers and cannot be terminal profile categories. For profile
bounds, declared_state_only represents an empty set of external dependencies and
none represents an empty set of concrete effects. A core-operation profile may
narrow those concrete sets but never widen its row; an empty narrowed set is
represented by its exclusive sentinel. A deterministic base row accepts only a
profile whose final category is deterministic; a nondeterministic profile is
out of bounds. A missing, ambiguous, incomplete, or out-of-bounds required
profile role cannot begin effects.

The closed required local core-profile role map is:
    core.analyze=analysis; core.verify=verification; core.report=reporting;
    core.create=target; core.write=write; core.modify=change; core.copy=copy;
    core.move=move; core.rename=rename; core.delete=delete;
    core.generate=generation; core.convert=conversion;
    core.execute(non_graph)=execution; core.execute(graph)=none;
    core.install=package;
    core.uninstall=package; core.start=start; core.stop=stop;
    core.send=transport; core.publish=publication; core.upload=transfer;
    core.download=source+transfer; core.memory_write=storage;
    core.state_update=storage.
Each listed role applies to every invocation except core.execute. A non-graph
core.execute target (PATH, URI, or STRING) requires the execution role; a graph
target (REFERENCE[TASK|PHASE|SEQUENCE|ACTION|TEST]) has no local execution
profile and resolves every reachable profile transitively. A core operation
absent from the map requires no local core profile. A custom kind.operation
requires the implementation role. No unlisted local profile role is permitted.

A deterministic base row remains deterministic and accepts only a deterministic
profile. A nondeterministic base row resolves deterministic only when its
immutable profile removes every permitted variation and declares an exact source
satisfying the deterministic identity; otherwise it remains nondeterministic. A
derived row applies that exact mapping to the final deterministic or
nondeterministic categories of its resolved profiles and/or graph.
DETERMINISTIC TRUE is verified only after that resolution and never causes
category narrowing.

Every custom kind.operation also resolves through exactly one such profile. Its
profile declares dependency and effect maxima from the same closed vocabularies.
SIDE_EFFECT FALSE requires possible effects exactly {none}; SIDE_EFFECT TRUE
requires one or more concrete effect classes and forbids none. DETERMINISTIC TRUE
requires the profile's final category to be deterministic. DETERMINISTIC FALSE
conservatively permits either final category and never relaxes another rule.
Thus an ACTION that names a custom operation contributes concrete resolved axes
rather than an unclassified boolean.

An invocation must not acquire an unregistered or undeclared dependency or
effect. For a referenced TASK, PHASE, SEQUENCE, ACTION, or TEST, a prohibited
reference cycle emits error.reference.cycle and fails before axis resolution.
Every reachable core row or custom kind.operation profile then resolves to a
final deterministic or nondeterministic category and invocation sets. The graph
is deterministic
exactly when every reachable resolved operation is deterministic, including
when no operation is reachable; any reachable nondeterministic operation makes
the graph nondeterministic. The transitive union contains concrete external
dependency and effect classes only. If at least one external dependency is
present, declared_state_only is omitted; otherwise the dependency result is
exactly {declared_state_only}. If at least one concrete effect is present, none
is omitted; otherwise the effect result is exactly {none}.

The six derived core rows have these closed final-category mappings. core.sort is
deterministic for every valid invocation and otherwise fails. core.verify is
deterministic exactly when its immutable verification profile is
deterministic because its resolved assertion evaluation is always deterministic.
core.test is deterministic in comparison-only mode and otherwise copies the
referenced graph category.
core.execute copies its execution-profile category in non-graph mode and its
graph category in graph mode. core.publish copies its publication-profile
category after destination, visibility, and replacement policy are fixed.
core.download is deterministic exactly when its source profile fixes one
immutable identity and content snapshot and both its source and transfer
profiles are deterministic; otherwise core.download resolves nondeterministic.

For a kind.operation definition, DETERMINISTIC TRUE is a contract assertion
verified after the referenced core operation or selected profile is fully
resolved. It is not an override and cannot convert nondeterministic behavior into
deterministic behavior. Validation emits error.determinism.mismatch exactly when
DETERMINISTIC TRUE is declared and that resolved contract is nondeterministic.
The error is nonrecoverable, has validation stage, and defaults to status.invalid.
DETERMINISTIC FALSE conservatively permits either deterministic behavior or
bounded nondeterminism and does not relax any other operation, dependency,
effect, result, or validation rule.
